 Ser Ciappelletto cheats a holy friar by a false confession,and dies; and, having lived as a very bad man,is, on his death, reputed a saint, and called SanCiappelletto. A seemly thing it is, dearest ladies, that whatever we do, it be      begun      in the holy and awful name of Him who was the maker of all. Wherefore,      as it falls to me to lead the way in this your enterprise of storytelling,      I intend to begin with one of His wondrous works, that, by      hearing thereof, our hopes in Him, in whom is no change, may be      established, and His name be by us forever lauded.  'Tis manifest      that, as things temporal are all doomed to pass and perish, so within      and without they abound with trouble and anguish and travail, and      are subject to infinite perils; nor, save for the especial grace of God,      should we, whose being is bound up with and forms part of theirs,      have either the strength to endure or the wisdom to combat their      adverse influences.  By which grace we are visited and penetrated      (so we must believe) not by reason of any merit of our own, but      solely out of the fulness of God's own goodness, and in answer to the      prayers of those who, being mortal like ourselves, did faithfully      observe His ordinances during their lives, and are now become      blessed for ever with Him in heaven. To whom, as to advocates      taught by experience all that belongs to our frailty, we, not daring,      perchance, to present our petitions in the presence of so great a Judge,      make known our requests for such things as we deem expedient for      us.  And of His mercy richly abounding to usward we have further      proof herein, that, no keenness of mortal vision being able in any      degree to penetrate the secret counsels of the Divine mind, it      sometimes,      perchance, happens, that, in error of judgment, we make one      our advocate before His Majesty, who is banished from His presence      in eternal exile, and yet He to whom nothing is hidden, having      regard rather to the sincerity of our prayers than to our ignorance or      the banishment of the intercessor, hears us no less than if the intercessor      were in truth one of the blest who enjoy the light of His      countenance.  Which the story that I am about to relate may serve      to make apparent; apparent, I mean, according to the standard of      the judgment of man, not of God. The story goes, then, that Musciatto Franzesi, a great and      wealthy merchant, being made a knight in France, and being to      attend Charles Sansterre, brother of the King of France, when he      came into Tuscany at the instance and with the support of Pope      Boniface, found his affairs, as often happens to merchants, to be      much involved in divers quarters, and neither easily nor suddenly to      be adjusted; wherefore he determined to place them in the hands of      commissioners, and found no difficulty except as to certain credits      given to some Burgundians, for the recovery of which he doubted      whether he could come by a competent agent;  for well he knew      that the Burgundians were violent men and ill-conditioned and      faithless; nor could he call to mind any man so bad that he could      with confidence oppose his guile to theirs.  After long pondering      the matter, he recollected one Ser Ciapperello da Prato, who much      frequented his house in Paris. Who being short of stature and very      affected, the French who knew not the meaning of Cepparello,       but supposed that it meant the same as Cappello, i. e. garland, in their      vernacular, called him not Cappello, but Ciappelletto by reason of his      diminutive size; and as Ciappelletto he was known everywhere,      whereas few people knew him as Ciapperello.  Now Ciappelletto's      manner of life was thus. He was by profession a notary, and his      pride was to make false documents; he would have made them as      often as he was asked, and more readily without fee than another      at a great price; few indeed he made that were not false, and great      was his shame when they were discovered.  False witness he bore,      solicited or unsolicited, with boundless delight; and, as oaths were in      those days had in very great respect in France, he, scrupling not to      forswear himself, corruptly carried the day in every case in which he      was summoned faithfully to attest the truth.  He took inordinate      delight, and bestirred himself with great zeal, in fomenting ill-feeling,      enmities, dissensions between friends, kinsfolk and all other folk;      and the more calamitous were the consequences the better he was      pleased.  Set him on murder, or any other foul crime, and he never      hesitated, but went about it with alacrity; he had been known on      more than one occasion to inflict wounds or death by preference      with his own hands.  He was a profuse blasphemer of God and His      saints, and that on the most trifling occasions, being of all men the      most irascible. He was never seen at church, held all the sacraments      vile things, and derided them in language of horrible ribaldry.      On the other hand he resorted readily to the tavern and other      places of evil repute, and frequented them. He was as fond of      women as a dog is of the stick: in the use against nature he had      not his match among the most abandoned. He would have pilfered      and stolen as a matter of conscience, as a holy man would make an      oblation. Most gluttonous he was and inordinately fond of his      cups, whereby he sometimes brought upon himself both shame and      suffering. He was also a practised gamester and thrower of false      dice.  But why enlarge so much upon him? Enough that he was,      perhaps, the worst man that ever was born.The rank and power of Musciatto Franzesi had long been this reprobate's mainstay, serving in many instances to secure him considerate treatment on the part of the private persons whom he frequently, and the court which he unremittingly, outraged.  So Musciatto, having bethought him of this Ser Cepparello, with whose way of life he was very well acquainted, judged him to be the very sort of person to cope with the guile of the Burgundians. He therefore sent for him, and thus addressed him:  \u201c Ser Ciappelletto, I am, as thou knowest, about to leave this place for good; and among those with whom I have to settle accounts are certain Burgundians, very wily knaves; nor know I the man whom I could more fitly entrust with the recovery of my money than thyself. Wherefore, as thou hast nothing to do at present, if thou wilt undertake this business, I will procure thee the favour of the court, and give thee a reasonable part of what thou shalt recover.\u201d  Ser Ciappelletto, being out of employment, and by no means in easy circumstances, and about to lose Musciatto, so long his mainstay and support, without the least demur, for in truth he had hardly any choice, made his mind up and answered that he was ready to go. So the bargain was struck.  Armed with the power of attorney and the royal letters commendatory, Ser Ciappelletto took leave of Messer Musciatto and hied him to Burgundy, where he was hardly known to a soul. He set about the business which had brought him thither, the recovery of the money, in a manner amicable and considerate, foreign to his nature, as if he were minded to reserve his severity to the last.  While thus occupied, he was frequently at the house of two Florentine usurers, who treated him with great distinction out of regard for Messer Musciatto; and there it so happened that he fell sick. The two brothers forthwith placed physicians and servants in attendance upon him, and omitted no means meet and apt for the restoration of his health.  But all remedies proved unavailing; for being now old, and having led, as the physicians reported, a disorderly life, he went daily from bad to worse like one stricken with a mortal disease. This greatly disconcerted the two brothers;  and one day, hard by the room in which Ser Ciappelletto lay sick, they began to talk about him; saying one to the other:  \u201c What shall we do with this man? We are hard bested indeed on his account. If we turn him out of the house, sick as he is, we shall not only incur grave censure, but shall evince a signal want of sense; for folk must know the welcome we gave him in the first instance, the solicitude with which we have had him treated and tended since his illness, during which time he could not possibly do aught to displease us, and yet they would see him suddenly turned out of our house sick unto death.  On the other hand he has been so bad a man that he is sure not to confess or receive any of the Church's sacraments; and dying thus unconfessed, he will be denied burial in church, but will be cast out into some ditch like a dog;  nay, 'twill be all one if he do confess, for such and so horrible have been his crimes that no friar or priest either will or can absolve him; and so, dying without absolution, he will still be cast out into the ditch.  In which case the folk of these parts, who reprobate our trade as iniquitous and revile it all day long, and would fain rob us, will seize their opportunity, and raise a tumult, and make a raid upon our houses, crying: 'A way with these Lombard dogs, whom the Church excludes from her pale;' and will certainly strip us of our goods, and perhaps take our lives also; so that in any case we stand to lose if this man die.\u201d Ser Ciappelletto, who, as we said, lay close at hand while theythus spoke, and whose hearing was sharpened, as is often the case,by his malady, overheard all that they said about him. So he calledthem to him, and said to them: \u201c I would not have you disquiet  yourselves in regard of me, or apprehend loss to befall you by my  death. I have heard what you have said of me and have no doubt  that 'twould be as you say, if matters took the course you anticipate;  but I am minded that it shall be otherwise.  I have committed so  many offences against God in the course of my life, that one more in  the hour of my death will make no difference whatever to the account.   So seek out and bring hither the worthiest and most holy friar you  can find, and leave me to settle your affairs and mine upon a sound  and solid basis, with which you may rest satisfied.\u201d  The two brothershad not much hope of the result, but yet they went to a friary andasked for a holy and discreet man to hear the confession of a Lombardthat was sick in their house, and returned with an aged man of justand holy life, very learned in the Scriptures, and venerable and heldin very great and especial reverence by all the citizens.  As soon ashe had entered the room where Ser Ciappelletto was lying, and hadtaken his place by his side, he began gently to comfort him: then heasked him how long it was since he was confessed.  Whereto SerCiappelletto, who had never been confessed, answered: \u201c Father, it  is my constant practice to be confessed at least once a week, and  many a week I am confessed more often; but true it is, that, since I  have been sick, now eight days, I have made no confession, so sore  has been my affliction.\u201d  \u201c Son,\u201d  said the friar, \u201c thou hast well  done,  and well for thee, if so thou continue to do; as thou dost confess  so often, I see that my labour of hearkening and questioning will be  slight.\u201d  \u201c Nay but, master friar,\u201d  said Ser Ciappelletto, \u201c say not  so; I have not confessed so often but that I would fain make a  general confession of all my sins that I have committed, so far as  I can recall them, from the day of my birth to the present time;  and therefore I pray you, my good father, to question me precisely in  every particular just as if I had never been confessed.  And spare me  not by reason of my sickness, for I had far rather do despite to my  flesh than, sparing it, risk the perdition of my soul, which my Saviour  redeemed with His precious blood.\u201d The holy man was mightily delighted with these words, whichseemed to him to betoken a soul in a state of grace. He thereforesignified to Ser Ciappelletto his high approval of this practice; andthen began by asking him whether he had ever sinned carnally witha woman.  Whereto Ser Ciappelletto answered with a sigh: \u201c My  father, I scruple to tell you the truth in this matter, fearing lest I sin  in vain-glory.\u201d  \u201c Nay, but,\u201d  said the friar, \u201c speak boldly; none  ever sinned by telling the truth, either in confession or otherwise.\u201d  \u201c Then,\u201d  said Ser Ciappelletto, \u201c as you bid me speak boldly, I will  tell you the truth of this matter. I am virgin even as when I issued  from my mother's womb.\u201d  \u201c Now God's blessing on thee,\u201d  said thefriar, \u201c well done; and the greater is thy merit in that, hadst thou  so willed, thou mightest have done otherwise far more readily than  we who are under constraint of rule.\u201d  He then proceeded to ask,whether he had offended God by gluttony. Whereto Ser Ciappelletto,heaving a heavy sigh, answered that he had frequently so offended;for, being wont to fast not only in Lent like other devout persons, butat least three days in every week, taking nothing but bread and water,he had quaffed the water with as good a gusto and as much enjoyment,more particularly when fatigued by devotion or pilgrimage, as greatdrinkers quaff their wine; and oftentimes he had felt a craving forsuch dainty dishes of herbs as ladies make when they go into thecountry, and now and again he had relished his food more thanseemed to him meet in one who fasted, as he did, for devotion. \u201c Son,\u201d  said the friar, \u201c these sins are natural and very trifling; and  therefore I would not have thee burden thy conscience too much  with them. There is no man, however holy he may be, but must  sometimes find it pleasant to eat after a long fast and to drink after  exertion.\u201d  \u201c O, my father,\u201d  said Ser Ciappelletto, \u201c say not this to  comfort me. You know well that I know, that the things which are  done in the service of God ought to be done in perfect purity of  an unsullied spirit; and whoever does otherwise sins.\u201d  The friar,well content, replied: \u201c Glad I am that thou dost think so, and I  am mightily pleased with thy pure and good conscience which therein  appears; but tell me: hast thou sinned by avarice, coveting more  than was reasonable, or withholding more than was right?\u201d  \u201c My  father,\u201d  replied Ser Ciappelletto, \u201c I would not have you disquiet  yourself, because I am in the house of these usurers: no part have  I in their concerns; nay, I did but come here to admonish and  reprehend them, and wean them from this abominable traffic; and  so, I believe, I had done, had not God sent me this visitation.  But  you must know, that my father left me a fortune, of which I dedicated  the greater part to God; and since then for my own support and the  relief of Christ's poor I have done a little trading, whereof I have desired  to make gain; and all that I have gotten I have shared with God's  poor, reserving one half for my own needs and giving the other half  to them; and so well has my Maker prospered me, that I have ever  managed my affairs to better and better account.\u201d  \u201c Well done,\u201d said the friar; \u201c but how? hast thou often given way to anger?\u201d  \u201c Often indeed, I assure you,\u201d  said Ser Ciappelletto. \u201c And who  could refrain therefrom, seeing men doing frowardly all day long,  breaking the commandments of God and recking nought of His  judgments?  Many a time in the course of a single day I had rather  be dead than alive, to see the young men going after vanity, swearing  and forswearing themselves, haunting taverns, avoiding the churches,  and in short walking in the way of the world rather than in God's  way.\u201d  \u201c My son,\u201d  said the friar, \u201c this is a righteous wrath; nor  could I find occasion therein to lay a penance upon thee. But did  anger ever by any chance betray thee into taking human life, or  affronting or otherwise wronging any?\u201d  \u201c Alas,\u201d  replied SerCiappelletto, \u201c alas, sir, man of God though you seem to me, how  come you to speak after this manner? If I had had so much  as the least thought of doing any of the things of which you speak,  should I believe, think you, that I had been thus supported or  God? These are the deeds of robbers and such like evil men, to  whom I have ever said, when any I saw: 'Go, God change your  heart.'\u201d  Said then the friar: \u201c Now, my son, as thou hopest to  be blest of God, tell me, hast thou never borne false witness against  any, or spoken evil of another, or taken the goods of another without  his leave?\u201d  \u201c Yes, master friar,\u201d  answered Ser Ciappelletto, \u201c most  true it is that I have spoken evil of another; for I had once a neighbour  who without the least excuse in the world was ever beating his  wife, and so great was my pity of the poor creature, whom, when he  was in his cups, he would thrash as God alone knows how, that once I  spoke evil of him to his wife's kinsfolk.\u201d  \u201c Well, well,\u201d  said thefriar, \u201c thou tellest me thou hast been a merchant; hast thou ever  cheated any, as merchants use to do?\u201d  \u201c I'faith, yes, master friar,\u201d said Ser Ciappelletto; \u201c but I know not who he was; only that he  brought me some money which he owed me for some cloth that  I had sold him, and I put it in a box without counting it, where  a month afterwards I found four farthings more than there should  have been, which I kept for a year to return to him, but not seeing  him again, I bestowed them in alms for the love of God.\u201d  \u201c This,\u201d said the friar, \u201c was a small matter; and thou didst well to bestow  them as thou didst.\u201d  The holy friar went on to ask him manyother questions, to which he made answer in each case in this sort.Then, as the friar was about to give him absolution, Ser Ciappellettointerposed: \u201c Sir, I have yet a sin to confess.\u201d  \u201c What?\u201d  asked thefriar. \u201c I remember,\u201d  he said, \u201c that I once caused my servant to  sweep my house on a Saturday after none; and that my observance  of Sunday was less devout than it should have been.\u201d  \u201c O, my son,\u201d said the friar, \u201c this is a light matter.\u201d  \u201c No,\u201d  said Ser Ciappelletto,\u201c say not a light matter; for Sunday is the more to be had in honour  because on that day our Lord rose from the dead.\u201d  Then said theholy friar: \u201c Now is there aught else that thou hast done?\u201d  \u201c Yes, master friar,\u201d  replied Ser Ciappelletto, \u201c once by inadvertence  I spat in the church of God.\u201d  At this the friar began to smile, andsaid: \u201c My son, this is not a matter to trouble about; we, who are  religious, spit there all day long.\u201d  \u201c And great impiety it is when  you so do,\u201d  replied Ser Ciappelletto, \u201c for there is nothing that  is so worthy to be kept from all impurity as the holy temple in which  sacrifice is offered to God.\u201d  More he said in the same strain, which Ipass over; and then at last he began to sigh, and by and by to weepbitterly, as he was well able to do when he chose.  And the friar demanding: \u201c My son, why weepest thou?\u201d  \u201c Alas, master friar,\u201d  answered Ser Ciappelletto, \u201c a sin yet remains, which I have  never confessed, such shame were it to me to tell it; and as often as  I call it to mind, I weep as you now see me weep, being well assured  that God will never forgive me this sin.\u201d  Then said the holy friar:\u201c Come, come, son, what is this that thou sayst? If all the sins of  all the men, that ever were or ever shall be, as long as the world shall  endure, were concentrated in one man, so great is the goodness of  God that He would freely pardon them all, were he but penitent and  contrite as I see thou art, and confessed them: wherefore tell me thy  sin with a good courage.\u201d  Then said Ser Ciappelletto, still weepingbitterly: \u201c Alas, my father, mine is too great a sin, and scarce can  I believe, if your prayers do not co-operate, that God will ever grant  me His pardon thereof.\u201d  \u201c Tell it with a good courage,\u201d  said thefriar; \u201c I promise thee to pray God for thee.\u201d  Ser Ciappelletto,however, continued to weep, and would not speak, for all the friar'sencouragement. When he had kept him for a good while in suspense,he heaved a mighty sigh, and said: \u201c My father, as you promise me  to pray God for me, I will tell it you. Know, then, that once, when I  was a little child, I cursed my mother;\u201d  and having so said he beganagain to weep bitterly.  \u201c O, my son,\u201d  said the friar, \u201c does this seem  to thee so great a sin? Men curse God all day long, and He pardons  them freely, if they repent them of having so done; and thinkest  thou He will not pardon thee this? Weep not, be comforted, for  truly, hadst thou been one of them that set Him on the Cross, with  the contrition that I see in thee, thou wouldst not fail of His pardon.\u201d  \u201c Alas! my father,\u201d  rejoined Ser Ciappelletto, \u201c what is this you  say? To curse my sweet mother that carried me in her womb  for nine months day and night, and afterwards on her shoulder  more than a hundred times! Heinous indeed was my offence;  'tis too great a sin; nor will it be pardoned, unless you pray God  for me.\u201d The friar now perceiving that Ser Ciappelletto had nothing moreto say, gave him absolution and his blessing, reputing him for a mostholy man, fully believing that all that he had said was true. Andwho would not have so believed, hearing him so speak at the pointof death?  Then, when all was done, he said: \u201c Ser Ciappelletto,  if God so will, you will soon be well; but should it so come to pass  that God call your blessed soul to Himself in this state of grace, is  it well pleasing to you that your body be buried in our convent?\u201d  \u201c Yea, verily, master friar,\u201d  replied Ser Ciappelletto; \u201c there would  I be, and nowhere else, since you have promised to pray God for  me; besides which I have ever had a special devotion to your order.  Wherefore I pray you, that, on your return to your convent, you  cause to be sent me that very Body of Christ, which you consecrate  in the morning on the altar; because (unworthy though I be) I  purpose with your leave to take it, and afterwards the holy and  extreme unction, that, though I have lived as a sinner, I may die  at any rate as a Christian.\u201d  The holy man said that he was greatlydelighted, that it was well said of Ser Ciappelletto, and thathe would cause the Host to be forthwith brought to him; andso it was. The two brothers, who much misdoubted Ser Ciappelletto's powerto deceive the friar, had taken their stand on the other side of awooden partition which divided the room in which Ser Ciappellettolay from another, and hearkening there they readily heard and understoodwhat Ser Ciappelletto said to the friar; and at times couldscarce refrain their laughter as they followed his confession; andnow and again they said one to another:  \u201c What manner of man  is this, whom neither age nor sickness, nor fear of death, on the  threshold of which he now stands, nor yet of God, before whose  judgment-seat he must soon appear, has been able to turn from his  wicked ways, that he die not even as he has lived?\u201d  But seeing thathis confession had secured the interment of his body in church, theytroubled themselves no further.  Ser Ciappelletto soon afterwardscommunicated, and growing immensely worse, received the extremeunction, and died shortly after vespers on the same day on which hehad made his good confession.  So the two brothers, having fromhis own moneys provided the wherewith to procure him honourablesepulture, and sent word to the friars to come at even to observe theusual vigil, and in the morning to fetch the corpse, set all thingsin order accordingly.  The holy friar who had confessed him, hearingthat he was dead, had audience of the prior of the friary; a chapterwas convened and the assembled brothers heard from the confessor'sown mouth how Ser Ciappelletto had been a holy man, as hadappeared by his confession, and were exhorted to receive the bodywith the utmost veneration and pious care, as one by which therewas good hope that God would work many miracles.  To this theprior and the rest of the credulous confraternity assenting, they wentin a body in the evening to the place where the corpse of SerCiappelletto lay, and kept a great and solemn vigil over it; and inthe morning they made a procession habited in their surplices andcopes, with books in their hands and crosses in front; and chantingas they went, they fetched the corpse and brought it back to theirchurch with the utmost pomp and solemnity, being followed byalmost all the folk of the city, men and women alike.  So it was laidin the church, and then the holy friar who had heard the confessiongot up in the pulpit and began to preach marvellous things of SerCiappelletto's life, his fasts, his virginity, his simplicity andguilelessness and holiness; narrating among other matters that of whichSer Ciappelletto had made tearful confession as his greatest sin, andhow he had hardly been able to make him conceive that God wouldpardon him; from which he took occasion to reprove his hearers;saying: \u201c And you, accursed of God, on the least pretext, blaspheme  God and His Mother, and all the celestial court.\u201d  And muchbeside he told of his loyalty and purity; and, in short, so wroughtupon the people by his words, to which they gave entire credence,that they all conceived a great veneration for Ser Ciappelletto, andat the close of the office came pressing forward with the utmostvehemence to kiss the feet and the hands of the corpse, from whichthey tore off the cerements, each thinking himself blessed to havebut a scrap thereof in his possession; and so it was arranged thatit should be kept there all day long, so as to be visible and accessibleto all.  At nightfall it was honourably interred in a marble tombin one of the chapels, where on the morrow, one by one, folk cameand lit tapers and prayed and paid their vows, setting there thewaxen images which they had dedicated.  And the fame of Ciappelletto'sholiness and the devotion to him grew in such measure thatscarce any there was that in any adversity would vow aught to anysaint but he, and they called him and still call him San Ciappelletto,affirming that many miracles have been and daily are wrought byGod through him for such as devoutly crave his intercession. So lived, so died Ser Cepperello da Prato, and came to be reputeda saint, as you have heard. Nor would I deny that it is possible thathe is of the number of the blessed in the presence of God, seeingthat, though his life was evil and depraved, yet he might in his lastmoments have made so complete an act of contrition that perchanceGod had mercy on him and received him into His kingdom. But,as this is hidden from us, I speak according to that which appears,and I say that he ought rather to be in the hands of the devil in hellthan in Paradise.  Which, if so it be, is a manifest token of thesuperabundance of the goodness of God to usward, inasmuch as Heregards not our error but the sincerity of our faith, and hearkensunto us when, mistaking one who is at enmity with Him for afriend, we have recourse to him, as to one holy indeed, as our intercessorfor His grace.  Wherefore, that we of this gay companymay by His grace be preserved safe and sound throughout this timeof adversity, commend we ourselves in our need to Him, whosename we began by invoking, with lauds and reverent devotion andgood confidence that we shall be heard. And so he was silent.